---
title: "Roles @ Signavio"
description: "How our engineering department has evolved over time"
tags: internal, company roles
author: Rachel Stiles
layout: article
image:
  feature: _/2017/team.jpg
  alt: "Teamwork"
---

Since Signavio's founding in 2009, we've experience an explosion of growth.
From our days as a handful of students working on a research project, to the current phase of a small company growing extremely quickly, our engineering department has morphed and grown in many stages.

  <iframe height="700" style="border:none;margin:20px;" width="95%" src="../interactive/roles.html"></iframe>
  *A visual representation of Signavio's growth*

## 2009-2012

At the beginning, the Engineering department (such as it was) consisted of two people, Nico and Willi, doing the jobs of about fifteen. This was okay, though, because Signavio wasn't much more than a university project at this point.

This period saw the creation of the following roles:
* *Front-end Engineer* - Willi was initially our one and only front-end engineer. What set Signavio apart from other BPM software was the incorporation of UX concepts into our UI, which was entirely Willi's doing.

* *Back-end Engineer* - Nico was our original and only back-end engineer for a long time. He worked closely with Willi to develop Process Manager.

* *Support Engineer* - We had three support engineers at the beginning, who handled customer inquiries in addition to their other duties. In 2012, this position left the engineering department completely and became its own separate department.

* *IT Ops/System Administrator* - In addition to his back-end developer duties, Nico also handled IT Ops along with an additional engineer, who technically never worked at Signavio officially. ;-) (He later went on to found DubSmash, so he's doing very well for himself.) Together, they built the basis of our current IT infrastructure.

## 2013-2015

This was the period where Signavio as it exists today started to really take shape. We added 7 more front-end engineers in additional to Willi, and 10 more engineers to help Nico maintain our back-end. The support engineer role spun out from the Engineering department and became its own department entirely. Our IT Ops team expanded considerably. The growing demand for Signavio's products meant that a whole host of new roles were needed.

During this period, the Engineering department added the following new roles:
* *Quality Assurance Engineer* - The scale of and demand for our products meant that the only way Signavio could possibly hope to keep up our standard of quality was to create an entire team dedicated to testing and testing and then testing our products some more.

* *Help Desk Engineer* - As the number of employees grew at Signavio, so did their various tech and hardware needs. The Help Desk Engineer position was added to address the various problems that crop up day-to-day when you have employees of various technical aptitudes working with computers.

* *Team Lead* - Originally, our engineers split up into groups based on what features they wanted to help implement. These groups were very dynamic and changed frequently. However, as we hired more and more engineers, the freewheeling group format no longer worked very well. In 2015, we created the Team Lead position and created permanent teams based on features. This is the format our department has used ever since.

* *Product Manager* - Initially, Gero handled our product management needs. As Signavio's customer base grew, however, it started to become obvious that we couldn't use the same strategy to sell Workflow Accelerator as we could Process Manager, for example. Not only that, but the people who are in the best position to know the intricate ins-and-outs of each product are the people who actually work on new features for each product. So the Product Manager position was created, as a way to help the Pre-sales and Sales departments better serve and recruit customers.

## 2016-present

In our current stage, Signavio is experiencing massive growth, with new hires joining our team every month in various departments.
In Engineering, this growth has meant that we've been able to focus on improving our internal processes and formalizing the structure of our department.

During this period, the Engineering department added the following new roles:
* *Agile Coach* - One of the problems that appears in a fast-growing company is the issue of how to maintain lines of communication. To solve this, Signavio created an Agile team. One coach is focused on employee happiness, and the other is more interested in people--specifically, the interactions of each team.
Together, they're working on improving communication in the Engineering department, and ensuring Signavio remains a place that is fun to work.

* *Technical Writer* - While Signavio has always had people writing documentation as we went along, 2016 is when we created an official tech writing team, with two writers focused on the actual documentation and a head tech writer focused on translations, tooling, and our UI texts. The technical writing team also runs the blog you're currently reading ;-)

* *UI Designer* - Signavio has always been focused on including UX concepts in our products, thanks to Willi, but in 2017, we added an official UI Designer. Aside from ensuring visual consistency across the Signavio Business Transformation Suite, the UI Designer also focuses on creating new icons and graphics for new features (such as the icons used in our Customer Journey Maps) and generally ensuring the Signavio branding stays consistent across our company.  

* *UX Designer* - The newest role in our department, our UX Designer is focused on interaction flow and concepts, especially Human-Computer Interaction. As our UX Designer has a background in Marketing, she is especially adept at finding out what our customers expect from our products and how to integrate their needs into our UI.
