---
title: "Roles @ Signavio"
description: "How our engineering department has changed over time"
tags: internal, company roles
author: Rachel Stiles
layout: article
image:
  feature: _/2017/team.jpg
  alt: "Teamwork"
---

Since Signavio's founding in 2009, we've experience an explosion of growth.
From our days as a handful of students working on a doctorate project, to the current phase of a small company growing quickly, our engineering department has morphed and grown in many stages.

Below is a visual representation of our evolution to the present:

  <iframe height="700" style="border:none;margin:20px;" width="95%" src="../interactive/roles.html"></iframe>

## Front-End & Back-End

From the start, Signavio's engineering department was divided into two sections--front-end and back-end.
Since we were extremely tiny during the 2009 phase, engineering consisted of two people with many many roles.


## IT Ops

Nico - IT operations, back-end
System Engineer
-General IT stuff
-Managing our IT infrastructure--keeping it running, scaling, deploying, etc.
-Security
-Test systems
-What our customers are using, basically
-Originally Nico + an external guy (who moved on to found company that created DubSmash)
-Switched to a different data center that provided more services, so that Nico would do the overview but they can do the day-to-day operations

Our support engineers work hard to ensure that any issues our users have are dealt with quickly and efficiently.
They are our customer service team.
They also coordinate with our technical writing team to ensure our user documentation is accurate and easy to understand.
They have deep knowledge of our products from our users' perspectives, which makes them a valuable part of our company.


## Quality Assurance

Support engineer:
-early on
-very early on
-one person many roles--2010 is when it really started
department itself came around 2012
Stefan became the project manager for support engineer/potential customers

Customer service--consulting, pre-sales, training AND Support


## Product Managers

Product Managers -- CEOs (Tormund, Gero)
circa 2013-2014 (Sven took over from Gero)

Product Managers, THEN team Leads
Originally devs were divided by projects (features they had to implement, etc.)
-Work until feature was finished, then switch up groups as needed
-Always changing, based on skills and what was needed to be completed
--Not the best way to work--we had too many features, needed continuous updates (some people became "lone rangers" because of their expertise/interest--often didn't work with others)
-Lack of real team feeling--which is why they were introduced
-Knowledge issue--if the expert on X becomes sick, what then?

Product Managers coordinate between their teams, the sales department, and our customers, all to better deliver our products.
Each product manager is an expert on their team's particular product, which makes it easier for our sales people to use them as a point person for any question potential clients might have.

## Team Leads

In the early days of Signavio, our engineering teams were very dynamic. People split into groups based on what feature they wanted to help implement. This worked well for a while, but eventually a problem emerged where people would tend to 
Assigned teams/groups, then go with work

Initially, our development teams worked in groups focused on specific features. People would team up based on their knowledge and skills, and the groups would naturally disperse once the feature was complete. However, over time, it was discovered that

## Agile Coaches

Added in 2016, our Agile coaches are focused on improving communication throughout the company.
They help our project managers with team management--helping them to develop ideas and encourage their members to come up with solutions on their own without extra coaching.
They focus on coming up with ways to change and improve our existing company processes--a neutral 3rd party to come in and offer suggestions, because sometimes it helps to have a fresh set of eyes on a set of problems.


## Technical Writers

Our technical writer positions were one of the last roles to develop at Signavio.
Due to Signavio's rapid growth, it quickly became evident that we needed a team dedicated to ensuring our user documentation was up to date and consistent.
They also produce various written works for our company, including our blogs (such as this article you are reading right now ;-))

## Product Designer

Design
2016
-Originally from marketing
Willi was originally our UX person\

Nico - IT operations, back-end

Web designer (CSS) but on the visual side, not so much code
Keep things consistent
Detail-oriented
Buttons, graphics (the people in our Customer Journey Maps)
Created the initial design for our user docs
Icons


## UX Designer

The newest role in our department, the UX Designer is focused on interaction flow and concepts, especially Human-Computer Interaction.
