---
title: "Announcing Pimba - serve static files quicker than ever"
description: "A Go-based command line tool for publishing and serving static files"
author: Stephano Zanzin, Timotheus Kampik
tags: static files, command line, CLI, Golang
layout: article
image:
  feature: /2017/records.jpg
  alt: "Records"
---

DevOps engineers frequently need to setup quick solutions to serve static files, for example to publish test artifacts or to make static pages like internal software documentation available as part of a continuous integration process.
In such scenarios, setting up a full-fledged web server and a comprehensive deployment pipeline feels like using a sledgehammer to crack a nut.
That's why our very own engineer [Stephano](https://github.com/microwaves) developed *Pimba*, a tool that allows you to serve and publish static files with nothing more than a few key strokes on the command line.

# Getting started with Pimba
To get started with Pimba, first install the tool with ``go get``:

```
$ go get github.com/signavio/pimba
```

Alternatively, you can download a binary release [here](https://github.com/signavio/pimba/releases/).

Then, run ``$ pimba api --storage /path/to/data/storage --secret <my-jwt-secret> --port <port-number>`` to run a Pimba server that publishes all files that are available at a provided path, for example:

```
$ pimba api --storage . --secret supersecret --port 4004
```

The argument ``--port`` is optional.
When you add or edit files at the provided path, Pimba makes the changes automatically available.

That's all you need to do to serve files with Pimba!
But you can also publish additional files to a specific resource (``bucket``) of the Pimba server.
For this, navigate to the directory you want to publish and run ``$ pimba push --server pimba.server.host:port --name my-bucket-name``.

This example makes the content of the current folder available at ``http://localhost:8080/test``:

```
$ pimba push --server localhost:8080 --name test
```

In contrast to the basic Pimba setup, you need to **explicitly** update files you've pushed to a specific resource.
For this, you need the token Pimba returns after the initial ``push``.
To update a bucket, run ``$ pimba push --server pimba.server.host:port --name my-bucket-name --token returned-token``, for example:

```
$ pimba push --server localhost:8080 --name cM3dLMgjbO eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJidWNrZXQiOiJjTTNkTE1namJPIiwidGltZXN0YW1wIjoxNTA3OTA0MDY2fQ.zpSUeqH3JSI-Zq1_ljBLspNJjxwxg9dxsQLumUFR1n0
```

And that's all you need to know to use Pimba! For more details checkout the [README](https://github.com/signavio/pimba) or run ``$ pimba api --help``, respectively ``$ pimba push --help``.

**Do you have ideas for improving Pimba?**
Open an [issue](https://github.com/signavio/pimba/issues) or checkout the [code](https://github.com/signavio/pimba) and open a pull request!

# Alternatives
[Surge](http://surge.sh/) is a service that provides Pimba-like functionality in the cloud.
It's the way to go if you neither have nor need the infrastructure for hosting static files yourself.
In contrast, Pimba comes into play if your requirements don't allow using a cloud service. or if hosting files on a service within your organization's internal network is the most convenient way of providing them to the relevant people or IT systems.

<a style="background-color:black;color:white;text-decoration:none;padding:4px 6px;font-family:-apple-system, BlinkMacSystemFont, &quot;San Francisco&quot;, &quot;Helvetica Neue&quot;, Helvetica, Ubuntu, Roboto, Noto, &quot;Segoe UI&quot;, Arial, sans-serif;font-size:12px;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.2;display:inline-block;border-radius:3px;" href="https://unsplash.com/@iammrcup?utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_campaign=photographer-credit&amp;utm_content=creditBadge" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer" title="Download free do whatever you want high-resolution photos from Mr Cup / Fabien Barral"><span style="display:inline-block;padding:2px 3px;"><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" style="height:12px;width:auto;position:relative;vertical-align:middle;top:-1px;fill:white;" viewBox="0 0 32 32"><title></title><path d="M20.8 18.1c0 2.7-2.2 4.8-4.8 4.8s-4.8-2.1-4.8-4.8c0-2.7 2.2-4.8 4.8-4.8 2.7.1 4.8 2.2 4.8 4.8zm11.2-7.4v14.9c0 2.3-1.9 4.3-4.3 4.3h-23.4c-2.4 0-4.3-1.9-4.3-4.3v-15c0-2.3 1.9-4.3 4.3-4.3h3.7l.8-2.3c.4-1.1 1.7-2 2.9-2h8.6c1.2 0 2.5.9 2.9 2l.8 2.4h3.7c2.4 0 4.3 1.9 4.3 4.3zm-8.6 7.5c0-4.1-3.3-7.5-7.5-7.5-4.1 0-7.5 3.4-7.5 7.5s3.3 7.5 7.5 7.5c4.2-.1 7.5-3.4 7.5-7.5z"></path></svg></span><span style="display:inline-block;padding:2px 3px;">Mr Cup / Fabien Barral</span></a>
